# How to find true companionship 

On the most quiet night, you must respect what you dream of. If you dream about a person and not about your job, that person is more important. If you dream about a girl/guy and you do not dream about your future aspirations, that person is more important. If you dream about a girl/guy and you do not dream about your family, that girl/guy is more important. 

Now as I am a man, we will refer to this individual as a woman. Understand that this woman is not simply herself in your gossamer glorious-hued dream. In true essence, what any romantic love does is turn the idea of the woman into an idea of you. An idea of you with her, an idea of you without her, an idea of you that you habitually only permit as fulfilled or complete when she is in the dream. Remember these two things which are already true here and now. **You are already fulfilled.** Everything which we think comes from others or that we think we give them may only be accepted or sourced as truthfully as it is already within ourselves. You are a thinking, breathing human being. Love and romantic attachments are an egoic, adaptive sacrifice of self-fulfilment (maybe combatted by Stoicism) evolving for us to use as a means to create life, love and fulfil our own lives with. This structure of the ego balances the commitment to relationships and the eventual building of families about our innate ancient evolutionary impulses. 

Against the backdrop of this idea, acknowledge and respect this biological aspect of your humanity for this is the primary procreational driving impulse in everyone. When you like/love someone, cautiously and calmly learn that nothing which comes from her takes away or adds a thing to you besides these illusionary ideas of self that we cling to. Consider the thoughts we have of - I am better off with her or my life is lesser without her. This mental construct of "Her" in actuality has no bearing on you. Use your time when alone or in separation as the cushion to examine yourself and then be brave enough to face your feelings. When you do so, you do not have to be poetic to her about it but you should be truthful. This person is someone you imagine enriches your conscious life and brings joy to your world just as you feel a desire to do the same for her too. When you understand this as the mutually loving and positive source of how you feel about someone, then any action that you take and its result will be positive and loving. 

In the end, remember only this - you are all that is now and will be and this is all you need for today. Treat yourself with respect and understanding, treat yourself with love.