# Dying of the forest


I come from Senapati, a very small village nestled in the picturesque hills of Manipur. During my childhood days, we would frequently visit my mother’s garden where she would work till the sun was high up in the sky then she would call us to rest under the shade of a big tree and we would share a cup of tea along with what we locally call levü (a packed lunch made of rice and stew or chutney). It was more like an adventure as we got to notice a variety of flora and fauna. One can often see alluring insects making their way home or hunting for food. On the other hand, a bird chirping in the distance as the sun begins to set on the horizon. During the monsoon seasons, the cicadas would never stop buzzing. Dwelling back into the past now, it was a fascinating experience. The balance of nature and people created a beautiful harmony with the insects and animals humming alongside. 

However, after completing my graduation, I was home and I decided to visit my mother’s garden. It was surprising to see how the peacefulness had changed. The sun seemed to be hotter, days even warmer and the hot winds blew across your face making it humid and damp. I found fewer insect friends to be photographed. On asking my mum why the vast lands were cleared she mentioned that due to new settlements in the village, the land has been divided to accommodate new families for jhuming cultivation to provide sustenance and basic income. Upon delving deeper I came to understand that Jhum cultivation has been deeply rooted in the cultural traditions of the indigenous communities living in the northeastern states. The practice is not merely an agricultural technique but a way of life, deeply intertwined with the cultural fabric of hill people.

