# clinical diagnosis - Dr. Sandhya Ann

You are a clinical psychologist. I had been in a relationship with my girlfriend for a period of 7 years. She is the older of a superfetation twin. There are a total of seven children in the family. The oldest is female, followed by female, female, male, male, female and female in the order of ages. The subject is the second last in that order. There is a stepbrother who is older than all the above individuals. Let us call the female individual in question as "subject". I had begun a romantic relationship with the subject in October 2017. The subject comes from an economically deprived family whose main source of income was from her mother's job. The mother works as a peon cum sweeper in the district commissioner's office. The nature of her duties cause her to wake up early to clean the office which often takes a few hours. A quick return home to eat and she has to go back to wait as an attendant outside the door of commissioner's office. In the beginning, the subject was trusting, loving and empathetic to me. She had worked in Delhi as a BPO worker and took care of her older siblings there. One of her elder brother's had worked as a bank clerk for a year but left due to personal reasons. He quickly became an alcoholic and consequently died from liver cirrhosis. The other brother works in the armed forces and has been in an incestuous relationship with an older aunt since the last 15 years. Despite the best efforts of the subject and her entire family, they have been unable to separate that relationship. The eldest sister and her husband used to live with the mother after marriage for many years as the husband could not support them financially. The second sister has a better marriage with a banker. However, in the last few years she has been drinking alcohol and one often finds her high even during the day. The youngest sister is a disaster and has been in multiple sexual relationships with men during her stay in Delhi. She is a complete alcoholic and is unable to support herself. She has been living apart from her husband's family with her two children and currently stays with her mother. The third sister and her husband also live with their mother. This husband and the surviving younger male son are drinking partners and the individual is question is also in some stage of liver cirrhosis disease. All of them are dependent on the mother and subject for their financial needs. The subject works in a technical position in the commissioner's office and has the better job among her dependents. The brother in the armed forces only provides minor financial support to the subject and her family. After the death of the subject's brother in 2018, the mother descended into rampant alcohol abuse and was recently diagnosed with major liver cirrhosis in 2024. She has stopped drinking since then.
I had begun a romantic relationship with the subject in October 2017. We met through her stepbrother, a student of my parents who are both high school teachers. When in first met her, the subject was simple, loving, trusting and empathetic individual. We quickly started talking and in a few months the subject got close to me. She got her job at the commissioner's office and i helped her navigate the intricacies of IT learning since she had no idea about IT nor had she worked with it except in making BPO calls. I am a computer engineer and love CS. Within a year, the subject started talking about marriage and kids and would often come to stay overnight with my family. She got very close with my parents and younger sister who was her junior in high school. They became good friends and would often do a lot of things together. I found this suffocating and felt frustrated with the turn of events. I started talking to an ex-girlfriend who was writing a Phd and asked for my help with the technical and writing side of her work. My family in multilingual and we have almost native proficiency in English. Slowly the association with my ex descended into a romantic relationship. I did not give much time to the subject who still came and stayed overnight at my home and tried to sleep with me. She knew I was not being faithful but she did not break it off nor confront me about it. This situation continued for a year and half. My ex-girlfriend however realised I was not serious about marriage and got married to another man in February 2021. I confessed to the subject about everything and said that I was sorry for everything. She kept crying throughout and added that I had broken her heart into pieces and that she wanted to take a break. I agreed to not be romantically engaged with each other until she felt that she was ready to. After a month, we met, talked and I begged her to give me another chance to win her love again. She accepted and things started to get better from thereon. We quickly moved to an intense physical relationship and started having sex. But, whenever we would fight , she would always bring up the affair. I always kept my calm and said that I am guilty of this and would always love her and fulfill all her wishes. I had to move to a distant city for my job and we still talked everyday on the phone. However, she refused to sleep over my home anymore and would insist on going back to her house. In the new city, the subject's adult nephew lives with me. Our long distance relationship had its ups and downs but we persevered and began sharing plans for a future together. The subject and her family often drink together and when drunk would drunk call me and cry about her life. I listened and stood by her as much as possible supporting her and her family financially and emotionally as much as possible. But, she would sometimes cry and ask why I had spoiled everything by cheating on her. I said it was the past and that I am making amends for it now and would always love her. In January 2024, she said that she would like to get married as her family were insisting on it. I agreed and after discussing with her set a date for the winter. In April 2024, the subject suddenly said that she wanted to take a break as she still could not get over the fact that I had cheated on her and "spoiled" everything. I was irritated at this random decision and asked her if she would ever forgive me after all these years of the incident and my constant and unwavering love and devotion. It made her rethink her decision and she said she would work on it. But, it was never the same again. Our conversations were forced and mundane and I could sense a withdrawal in her behaviour. She stopped visiting my family frequently and started minimising contact with them. In July 2024, she finally said she could not love me like before and she would wanted to take a break but not breakup. She wanted to live a single life and explore herself and take care of her family. Finally, I was angry and asked her what she wanted from me and how long this break was supposed to last. The subject was unable to give any time-frame for reconciliation and got very defensive and angry. In a private conversation with her nephew, she stated that she felt I was hiding some facts from her and hence she had to take this extreme step. We have not talked to each other since except for two occasions when she needed an updated technical certificate for her job which only I could obtain. Last month, the mother of the nephew or her sister-in-law asked me if I had broken up with the subject as she had seen another man visiting the subject frequently and them going out together. The subject does not have a good relationship with either her stepbrother or her older brother. Her stepbrother is the father of the nephew who lives with me. The subject's personality also has undergone a significant change becoming sarcastic, self centered and bitter at me and even at my sister. The subject is also not willing to discuss alternatives for the way ahead. The subject has a female friend whom she has become very close to. Her friend is a high achiever and works in an important police position. She acted as an agony aunt for her friend back in 2020-21 when the friend was passing through a crisis position in her career. The family of the friend is rich with all the children being high achievers. The subject now often visits and stays with her friend and her family. No amount of work is too large to be considered for her friend. She sees herself as a support mechanism for the friend and even borrowed money from me to buy her friend a costly gift. The only time when she was angry with her friend and family was when she did not get any special treatment during the marriage of her friend's elder sister and had to be a member of the public partaking the marriage feast. When with her friend and her family, she becomes the girl that i first met and knew. I find it perplexing that she forgets or never does anything for me but is ready to cross mountains for her friend. What is your assessment of her character and is there any future for our relationship? I have deleted all her numbers and stopped talking to her because in hindsight i find that it has started to affect my work and cause me to lose productivity. I work on very high demanding projects and soon will be taking examinations to gain entry to a very prestigious high level position in the bureaucracy. My family is a very relaxed, accepting entity and they are as confused with her character change like I am. Will her issues be resolved on their own? or is professional help needed? What will be the best course of action for me to move ahead in life considering my situation?  Will she ever be able to lead a healthy emotional life and be the same happy trusting woman again? Should I just quietly walk away from her life or break off things by talking to her again risking opening old wounds?
Do an detailed assessment of the situation in clinical terms and examine the evidence presented. Also give an opinion on the issue. Consider if such issues were inside her all the time and just waiting for opportunities to surface or whether if it is due to the rapidly changing nature of the situation.


